\documentclass[12pt]{article}

\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage[authoryear,round]{natbib}
%\usepackage{hyperref}




\textwidth=6.2in
\textheight=8.5in
\oddsidemargin=.1in
\evensidemargin=.1in
\headheight=-.3in

\newcommand{\scscst}{\scriptscriptstyle}
\newcommand{\scst}{\scriptstyle}
\newcommand{\Rfunction}[1]{{\texttt{#1()}}}
\newcommand{\Rmethod}[1]{{\texttt{#1}}}  
\newcommand{\Rclass}[1]{{\texttt{#1}}}
\newcommand{\Robject}[1]{{\texttt{#1}}}
\newcommand{\Rpackage}[1]{{\textit{#1}}}
\newcommand{\code}[1]{{\texttt{#1}}}
\bibliographystyle{plainnat}
\def\tm{$^{\rm \text{TM }}$}

\title{Analysis of High Throughput Flow Cytometry Data using
\Rpackage{plateCore}}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\usepackage{Sweave}
\begin{document}
\maketitle

\clearpage
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section*{Abstract}
\subsection*{Background}
High throughput flow cytometry (FCM) studies are often run in a 96 or 384-well
plate format, with different samples, controls, and antibodies-dye conjugates
present on each plate. Analyzing a plate requires tracking the contents of each
well, matching sample wells with control wells, gating each well/channel
separately, making the appropriate plots, assessing quality, and finally
aggregating the results from multiple plates to make experiment level
conclusions. This process can be a significant task using traditional
point-and-click software packages, even when multiple instances are deployed.
We developed \Rpackage{plateCore} as an R/Bioconductor packaged to make
processing and analysis of large, complex datasets easier.

\subsection*{Methods}
\Rpackage{plateCore} was used to analyze the data from a BD FACS CAP screening
experiment where 5 Peripheral Blood Mononucleocyte Cell (PBMC) samples  were
assayed for 189 different human cell surface markers. This same dataset was
also manually analyzed by a cytometry expert using the FlowJo data analysis
software package(TreeStar, Ashland OR).

\subsection*{Results}
Positive markers identified using \Rpackage{plateCore} are in good agreement
with those found using manual analysis.

\subsection*{Conclusions}
\Rpackage{plateCore} provides a reproducible, objective platform for analyzing
high throughput FCM experiments. The R/Bioconductor implementation allows
bioinformaticians and statisticians access to the data, which should further
the development of automated analysis methods.

\clearpage
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section*{Introduction}

While there are a number of different software packages available for analysis
of FCM data, these programs are often ill-suited to the development of new
methods needed for analyzing high-throughput FCM studies. Flow Cytometry High
Content Screening (FC-HCS) experiments generate large volumes of data, and a
systematic approach to preprocessing, gating (i.e. filtering), and summarizing
results is needed for robust analyses. Automation of these steps would allow
analysis pipelines to be robust, objective, and match the high-throughput
capacity of modern cytometers. Unfortunately, current approaches to FC-HCS
analysis are semi-automated at best, and they often require significant
subjective and error-prone manual intervention to identify cells of interest
\citep{Maecker2005}. It is therefore desirable to develop programmatic
approaches to process FCM data.

FCM packages available through the Bioconductor \citep{BIOC} project provide an
open platform that can be used by cytometrists, bioinformaticians, and
statisticians to collaboratively develop new methods for automated FC-HCS
analysis. The basic data processing tools for importing, transforming, gating,
and organizing raw FCM data are in the \Rpackage{flowCore} package
\citep{hahne2009}, and the visualization functions are in \Rpackage{flowViz}
\citep{sarkar2008ufv}. The Bioconductor model for FCM data analysis facilitates
the development of new analysis methods, since the overhead associated with
accessing and visualizing FCM data is handled by \Rpackage{flowCore} and
\Rpackage{flowViz}. The availability of \Rpackage{flowCore} and
\Rpackage{flowViz} has enabled the creation of new tools for quality assessment
of large FCM experiments, such as \Rpackage{flowQ} \citep{lemeurFQ}, and
model-based clustering and automated gating, such as \Rpackage{flowClust}
\citep{lo2008}.

We have developed an R package (\Rpackage{plateCore}) that also takes advantage
of the functionality in \Rpackage{flowCore} and \Rpackage{flowViz} to create
methods and data structures for processing large, plate-based FCM datasets.
\Rpackage{plateCore} is not designed to be a GUI driven end-user tool, but
rather to help develop a standardized platform for the analysis of FC-HCS data.
These analyses often represent a collaborative effort between cytometry experts
who generate the data and the quantitative individuals who help deal with the
large volume information. In order for this collaboration to work, the
cytometrists must have confidence in the results of the automated analysis. To
this point, we demonstrate the equality of our results to those produced by an
expert cytometrist using FlowJo.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=7in,height=6in]{analysisSteps.pdf}
\caption{Typical FC-HCS plate workflow on the left and corresponding steps from
a PBMC lymphocyte \Rpackage{plateCore} analysis on the right. Compared to
analyses performed using existing GUI FCM tools, \Rpackage{plateCore} can
reduce the level of subjectivity associated with creating the negative control
gates and also makes it easier to aggregate multiple plates into an experiment
level object for visualization and reporting. Providing \Rpackage{plateCore}
scripts along with the raw FCM data for FC-HCS experiments helps to ensure that
analysis is transparent and reproducible. ( Need to label each of the columns
(manual analysis; plateCore workflow). is the last step in plateCore column
lined up OK? Is it supposed to match last 2 steps in left column, just the last
step? - Ryan)}
\label{fig:analysis}
\end{figure}
 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\clearpage
\section*{Materials and Methods}
\subsection*{Data}

BD FACS CAP was designed as a cell characterization tool to screen for the
presence a large number of different human cell surface markers. In this study,
previously frozen PBMC samples  from two donors were analyzed on a BD FACS
Calibur using BD FACS CAP staining. The analysis was performed on 96-well
plates with 189 different antibodies arrayed three per well in 63 test wells,
along with 30 isotype control wells and three unstained controls. The complete
list of BD FACS CAP antibodies can be found at
http://www.bd.com/technologies/discovery\_platform/BD\_FACS\_CAP.asp. FCM files
for the 5 plates (two for Donor 1 and three for Donor 2), are available for
download from http://www.ficcs.org.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\subsection*{Analysis}

%when you describe what was done, this should all be in past tense, it was a
% mixture of present and past
The goal of the PBMC FACS CAP study was to look for positive staining for the
189 different cell surface markers in lymphocytes. The \Rpackage{plateCore}
scripts used to perform the analysis are provided in supplementary materials.
Briefly, the FCM files were first processed using a combination of static
gates(\Robject{rectangleGate}) and data driven gates (using
\Robject{norm2filter} and \Rpackage{flowCore}) to pick out the lymphocytes in
the forward (FSC) and side scatter (SSC) (\%correct? - Ryan) channels.  The
quality of the data was then assessed by looking for fluidic events such as
bubbles, pressure drops, or large aggregates that can shift the baseline
fluorescence readings. Fluidic events can often be identified by plotting the
empirical cumulative density (ecdf) plots of FSC values for each well, and
looking for distributions shifted relative to other wells \citep{lemeur2007}.
Based on the ecdf plots, several wells were further investigated by cytometry
experts who determined that the shifts were in an acceptable range. Next the
threshold between positive and negative cells were determined using the isoytpe
controls, which provided a gross estimate of non-specific binding in the
primary antibodies. One-dimensional gates were created using using the isotype
thresholds, and these gates were applied to identify cells that are positively
stained for each marker.

An example of the progression from raw FCM data files to a completed
\Rpackage{plateCore} analysis is shown in Figure~\ref{fig:analysis}. List mode
FCS files for a single plate were read into a \Robject{flowSet} using
\Rpackage{flowCore}, and then a \Robject{flowPlate} was created by integrating
the plate annotation file with the \Robject{flowSet}. The \Robject{flowPlate}
was then compensated, data quality was assessed, and gates were set according
to a negative control. These control gates were then applied to test wells to
find cells that had specific staining in channels of interest.

In addition to \Rpackage{plateCore}, the five PBMC plates were also analyzed
using FlowJo. First, an analysis template is created where test wells and their
corresponding isotype control well were assigned to one of 30 groups. Wells in
each group had similar sets of antibody-dye conjugates, and the expression 
threshold (\emph{i.e.}, isotype gate) was initially set using the isotype
control well. Data for each plate was imported into FlowJo using the template
and lymphocytes were selected using a morphology (FSC-SSC) gate. Event data for
the isotype well was then visualized on a log scale, and the expression
threshold for each stained channel was set by picking a value that liesabove
the bulk of the events. For BD FACS CAP, the isotype gate is typically
(correct? does it always have to be 1\% exactly? If so reference a published
protocol or say according to manufactureres intructions or something - Ryan) set
so that less than 1\% of the events in the isotype well are above the
threshold. These gates were then applied to the test wells. The threshold was
moved up or down based on positive test wells. (\%explain this better, when
moved, under what conditions, and why - Ryan) The percentage of cells above the
threshold for each of the 189 antibodies was then exported to a separate
spreadsheet for each plate. (\%and then what? Some kind of comparison was made
.... From Ryan)

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section*{Results}

\subsection*{\Rpackage{plateCore}}
The five PBMC plates were analyzed using the approach shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:analysis}. Results were stored in \Robject{flowPlates}, which
are data structures that contain a description of the plate layout, morphology
gated (FSC-SSC) events, and parameters values for the the negative control
gates (\emph{i.e.}, isotype gates). Event level data can be visualized using
plotting functions from \Rpackage{plateCore} and \Rpackage{flowViz}.
Additionally, results from different plates can be aggregated, making it easier
to compare results from different plates and to create the complex reports
required to summarize results from 189 different markers.


A marker was classified as positive for BD FACS CAP was defined as having more
than 10\% of events above the isotype gate. Since antibody concentrations used
in BD FACS CAP are designed to screen a number of different cell types, the
concentrations are not necessarily optimal for these PBMC samples. The 10\%
cutoff is an empirically determined threshold (data not shown) used to select
markers for further analysis, including single color titration and competition
experiments to confirm that the marker is present and staining is specific.
Markers that are highly positive ($\ge$ 90\%) are usually confirmed in
follow-up studies, while markers that are low positives ($\le$ 15\%) are often
the result of non-specific staining. Also, these percentages refer to the
fraction of events above the isotype threshold, but this does not necessarily
imply heterogeneous staining in multiple populations. In this study 109/189
markers were positive on at least one plate.

Since the majority of antibodies on the BD FACS CAP staining plate are known to
bind different leukocytes, it is not surprising that a large fraction would be
identified as positive on PBMCs.  Markers such as CD44, CD45, CD47, and CD59
are broadly expressed on lymphocytes and were highly positive (>99\%) in this
study. 

The difficulty in determining whether a dim marker is expressed can be seen in
Figure~\ref{fig:mfiRatio}, where samples with Median Fluorescence Intensity
(MFI) (\%reference to what MFI is? - Ryan) ratios between 1 and 10 ranged from
0 to 100\% percent positive. If the isotype gate is near the MFI of the test
well signal, then estimates of the percentage of positive cells will be
unstable. (\%explain why - Ryan)




\clearpage
\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{outline-mfiRatio}
\caption{Plot of the Median Fluorescence Intensity (MFI) ratio for each of the
189 antibody-dye conjugates versus the percentage of positive events identified
using plateCore from the five PBMC plates. The MFI ratio refers to the ratio of
the test well MFI to the corresponding isotype control on a linear scale. Cell
populations with MFIs that are close to the isotype control are often split by
the isotype gate, reflecting the range of percent positive values for MFI
ratios between 1 and 10. (\%label axis better - \% positive whats - Ryan)}
\label{fig:mfiRatio}
\end{figure}

\clearpage
\subsection*{Comparison to FlowJo Results}
Automating the creation and modification of isotype gates made by cytometrists
analyzing BD FACS CAP data using FlowJo is challenging. Cytometrists adjust
gates based on expert knowledge about the performance of specific antibody
types and dyes, or after identifying positive test samples. The automated
approach employed in \Rpackage{plateCore} determines the threshold using
isotype controls.  The gate (G$_{ij}$) for isotype $i$, channel $j$ is set
according to:
\begin{equation}
\text{G}_{ij} = \max (\text{99th}_{ij} \text{, MFI}_{ij}+ 4 \text{MAD}_{ij}),
\label{isoGate}
\end{equation}
where 99th$_{ij}$ is the 99th percentile for the fluorescence signal and
MAD is Median Absolute Deviation on a linear scale. 
While this simple, non-parametric method works surprisingly well for BD FACS
CAP, advances in model-based clustering methods, such as those in
\Rpackage{flowClust}, should lead to future performance improvements in
automated gating. Comparisons of the \Rpackage{plateCore} and FlowJo analysis
are shown in Figure~\ref{fig:pcVSman}.

Examining in detail at one case where the \Rpackage{plateCore} and FlowJo
methods disagree, such as CD98 on plate 9208 (Figure~\ref{fig:disagree}),
highlights situations where our automated gating approach will fail. In this
case the marker is positive (86\% by FlowJo) (\%86\% what? This is confusing as
you said something over 10\% is labelled positive (I think) so 86\% positive is
confusing - Ryan) but is  called negative (0\%) (\%0\% what (same problem) -
Ryan) by \Rpackage{plateCore}. The isotype control (well H08 in
Figure~\ref{fig:disagree}) has >1\% of its events in the FL1-H channel (\%I
know caliburs can't be changed, but can you give this a meaningful label for
those that aren't used to the platform - Ryan) that are above the main
population, resulting in the automated gate being set at the 99th percentile
instead of the MFI+4MADS. Fortunately, this type of mistake can also be
detected by looking the MFI ratio plot in Figure~\ref{fig:mfiRatio}. CD98 for
plate 9208 has an MFI ratio of 5 and a percent positive value of 0\%, while
other markers with a similar MFI ratio have values near 70\%. Percent positive
values that lie far from the sigmoid curve in Figure~\ref{fig:mfiRatio} should
be evaluated manually.

%Setting the isotype gate using the our approach still requires subjective
%decisions regarding the fluorescence percentile and number of MADS, but these
%values have shown little variation within the different cell types
%that have been assayed using BD FACS CAP (results not shown). Within a
%particular cell type we are able to replicate the gating decisions made by
%cytometrists. If we encounter a new cell type or if the analysis
%is performed using a different cytometer, then the gate settings must be
%reevaluated.

\clearpage
\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{outline-pcVSman}
\caption{Percent positive results for 189 BD FACS CAP markers analyzed using
either \Rpackage{plateCore} or FlowJo for the 5 PBMC plates. Markers that
varied the most between the the two methods tended to have intermediate percent
positive values (30\% to 70\%), reflecting the difficulty of gating populations
whose MFI is near the isotype threshold. (\%need to say what the P0907 labels
mean, need mroe informative labels thatn just "`plate Cote and FlowJo (maybe
jsut stick "`analysis) at the end. Again its confusing what positive  vs 30\%
positive is. You said there was a threshold at 10\% to get the label of
positive. -- Ryan) }
\label{fig:pcVSman}
\end{figure}

\clearpage
\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{fjVSr2.pdf}
\caption{Dotplot for CD98 in well G01 and its isotype control well H08 for
plate 9208. FlowJo (86\%) and plateCore (0\%) reported dramatically different
percent positive values for this marker. The  difference was caused by the
isotype well having >1\% of the events above the main population, which
resulted in the automated gate being set at the 99th\% instead of the
MFI+4MADs. (indicate that G01 is a well ID PLate0909 is a plate ID - Ryan)}
\label{fig:disagree}
\end{figure}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\clearpage
\subsection*{Donor Variation}

A common goal for BD FACS CAP screens is to identify markers that show
variation in expression levels among cells isolated from different donors.
Variation in estimates of the percentage of positive cells can be modeled using
a binomial, where markers that are clearly positive or negative (0 or 100\%)
have little variation and those near the isotype gate (50\%) are highly
variable. Unfortunately, the power to detect differences in this study is
limited since there are only 2 donors and the level of replication is low (2-3
plates per donor). Figure~\ref{fig:donorVar} shows  the expected and observed
variation in the percentage of positively stained cells for the 189 markers.
Discounting CD98, which had an unusual isotype control, the markers with the
most variation (S.D. near 30\%) were CD85, CD97, CD154, CD184, and CD252. Since
CD85, CD97, CD154, and CD252 are associated with activated T-cells, it is
tempting to speculate that this difference represents biological variation
between the two donors as opposed to technical differences in the processing
and gating of the cells.




%
\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{outline-donorVar}
\caption{Scatterplot showing the mean percentage of positive cells for each
positive marker versus the observed (circles) and expected (line) sample
standard deviation. Expected values follow a binomial distribution with n=5.
Markers that lie above the expected line will (\%were? - Ryan) be further
evaluated using titration and competition experiments to see if these results
represent real variation between the two donors. The curve in the expected line
reflects the difficulty in gating samples whose median signal (MFI) is near the
isotype cutoff, since the percentage of positive cells calculated can shift
dramatically with small changes in the gate. (standard deveiation of what? mean
\% positive of what? - Ryan)) }
\label{fig:donorVar}
\end{figure}

%\begin{figure}
%\centering
%<<label=pbmcCDbd69,fig=TRUE,echo=FALSE>>=
%
%fileNames <- list.files("../../publicationPlateCore/pbmcRData",full.names=TRUE)
%
%plates <- lapply(fileNames,function(x){
%			load(x)
%			platePBMC[c("A03","B06")]
%		})
%
%virtPlate <- fpbind(plates[[1]],plates[[2]],
% plates[[3]],plates[[4]],plates[[5]])
%
%
%print(densityplot(~ `FL2-H` | as.factor(plateName), transform("FL2-H"=log10)
% %on% virtPlate, filterResult="Negative.Control",col=c('red','blue')))
%
%@
%\caption{Histograms for CDbd69, which is one of the 3 candidates for
% differential expression from Figure~\ref{fig:donorVar}.
%Isotypes are shown in red and test wells are in blue. Similar plots were
% automatically created using \Rpackage{plateCore}
%for each of 189 markers assayed in this experiment, allowing cytometry experts
% to quickly survey the results from the 5
%different plates.}
%\label{fig:pbmcCDbd69}
%\end{figure}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\clearpage
\section*{Discussion}

Our approach to this PBMC BD FACS CAP study relied on processing the raw data
in parallel using both FlowJo and \Rpackage{plateCore}. FlowJo allowed the
ctyometrists to thoroughly investigate individual wells, and gave them
confidence that the \Rpackage{plateCore} results were correct (see
Figure~\ref{fig:pcVSman}). Using \Rpackage{plateCore}, we were able to reduce
the level subjectivity in setting isotype gates, eliminate mistakes associated
with manual export and merging of plate output, and automate the creation of
plots and data quality reports that summarized the experiment. Additionally,
the \Rpackage{plateCore} scripts and experimental annotation can be shared with
other cytometry groups, allowing them to reproduce our analysis.

In addition to subjective gating, the lack of a standard format for describing
large FCM experiments also makes it difficult for anyone other than the
original experimenter to replicate an analysis. (You could add something about
MIFlowCyt here as well, as even if people had a format to follow, unless they
put all the data in necessary to understand, just having a format isn't enough
- Ryan) The development of mechanism to bundle experimental metadata
descriptions with FCS data files should make it easier to access metadata in
future FCM studies, but currently this information is typically provided either
as spreadsheet or a pictorial layout of a 96 well plate. Since the creation of
\Robject{flowPlate} requires users to make a standard sample annotation file,
plate layouts from \Rpackage{plateCore} can then be easily shared along with
the raw FCS2.0/3.0 files. The standard format for \Rpackage{plateCore} sample
annotations provides a convenient way to manage the plate metadata associated
with complex FC-HCS experiments.

%moved from methods
While this same analysis can be performed relatively quickly in 
other FCM software packages, it can be difficult to reproduce the gating
decisions made by a single expert user. (Expand - Ryan)

Markers that are expressed on a small subset of lymphocytes, or markers that
are dimly expressed, would not be found with this screening approach.
(Expand - Ryan)

Since, BD FACS CAP was designed as screening tool to 
identify markers for further analysis, false negatives were a bigger concern
than false positives. The plateCore settings were chosen to err on the side of
calling samples positive. (Why, make it clear to uninformed readers by stating
explicitly? what about for other studies? more discussion here - Ryan)

The complexity of large FCM experiments, like BD FACS CAP, highlight the 
difficulty of applying existing FCM analysis platforms to high-throughput
studies. Generating and interpreting results from this PBMC study required
extensive collaboration between flow cytometrists, bioinformaticians, and
statisticians. At various points in the analysis, each group needed to access
the raw data, annotation, and details about the experimental design. Providing
this access using stand-alone FCM platforms is expensive in terms of the price
of multiple software licenses and in time spent training statisticians and
bioinformaticians to use the programs. Fortunately the Bioconductor FCM
packages are modeled on standard data structures used for microarrays, which
should already be familiar to most quantitative individuals working on
high-throughput biological problems. We found that \Rpackage{flowCore},
\Rpackage{flowViz}, and \Rpackage{plateCore} provided an open analysis platform
that facilitated communication between the flow cytometrists generating the
data, and the computational experts analyzing the data.


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\clearpage
\bibliographystyle{plain}
\bibliography{outline} 

\end{document}
